Steph, okay, we're talking, and you wanted to start with Serrat.
Yeah, I just wanted to tell you that, and you can put all this together according to your own lights, you can just ask what you want, and I'll just hand it, but I'm just going to say that I was interested in the kind of a pointeous technique of writing the essay, because if I made it overly formal, you know, highly sequential or chronological, these three essays, it wouldn't
So that was a point I just wanted to make, that I had that ambition, because like a mosaic, if you stand too close to it, it may be looking at one little bit of smalto or stone, and not quite see the figure in the copper, or to change the metaphor, or the design of the mosaic.
But I think when you stand back, and Kirkus Review complained that it was just an aggregation of facts, and I don't think they read it well.
But my point is that if you stand back, you'll see
Is that what Kirkus said?
They'll probably say that about my book then.
They said, overstuffed like all his writing.
What did they say?
Overstuffed like all his novels.
I mean, the person hated me.
Kirkus is a nasty place, you know?
It really is.
There were pains in the ass.
So anyway, to answer that question, that was that ambition.
How did it start?
I actually wrote an article for Art and Antiques about four or five years ago on the color blue.
I got this idea of just writing the history of a color.
And I wasn't talking about a formal art, you know, a chronological history, because, again, I didn't want to descend to the formulaic.
So I just started thinking in a kind of subjective way about the connections of colors, of dyes, of lapis lazuli, and then it was a beautifully illustrated
article.
It was called Rhapsody in Blue, and it got more mail than any article in the history of that magazine.
So I talked with the editor at the time, Jeffrey Scheer, and said, you know, I should do something.
Several people wrote it and said he should do something on a color red.
So I just started tallying up things on yellow.
But you know, it's interesting.
You know the gas on Being Blue book, but
But I was telling someone the other day that, you know, I don't know if you know Aurobor, the Wiesman novel.
How do you spell it?
So I won't label it.
Wiesman, H-U-Y-S-M-A-N-S.
He's a French novelist.
And Aurobor, I translate in English against the grain.
You know, it's a classic, decadent novel.
Oscar Wilde loved it.
Well, I won't sum up the novel.
But briefly, it's about a decadent character named Desassins.
And he, at one point, throws a party where everything's black.
The food is black, black radishes, the plates are black, the meal is served by negresses naked.
So there's really an essay on black there.
And then I was thinking Melville's Moby Dick, you know, their great essay on white.
And so really there's a kind of, I think there's a kind of genre, almost a sub-genre in the artistic mind.
What a collection that would make.
Absolutely.
I've thought of that, and I've also thought of... Unique, really.
Yeah, it would.
There's probably someone that collects them.
Benjamin Moore would be the kind of collection.
Yeah, that's right.
I mentioned Benjamin Moore in there.
Yeah, you did.
That's why I mentioned the blue in your bedroom.
Yeah.
Do you know, I was once going to do it... Do you think of the number?
I was going to give an anthology one time, do an anthology of inaccessible literature, books and essays and stories and novels that are impossible to read.
Like Henry James wrote a short story called The Bench of Desolation, which is almost impossible to read.
I would put Parts of Gravity's Rainbow in there.
I think it's almost impossible.
Do you know anybody besides yourself possibly who's read Spencer's The Fairy Queen?
Well, but Spencer's the Fairy Queen is lucid compared to Meridus the Egoist.
Well, I'm saying it's great unread books.
No, well, unread books is one category, but I'm talking about books that you cannot enter.
But you can't find it.
Yeah, that you can't find it.
It would be an interesting anthology.
By the way, getting back to Isaiah Thomas, I bet there's not a statue to Isaiah Thomas in Worcester.
But there's a memorial in the antiquary.
But do you know there's not a statue to Poe in Boston, but there's one to Curley in Red Auerbach?
What?
There's not one to Lydia Maria Child in Medford or Over the River and Through the Woods.
I don't know, it gets my goat that we treat our artists so poorly in this country.
You know where there is a statue in England, and it's so wonderful, and Robert Giroux mentioned this to me, I wouldn't know it, but there's actually a little statue to Hemings and Cardinal who published Shakespeare's book.
Well, there should be.
Isn't that wonderful?
But not surprising, because it's a place where they would do that.
But to the men who...
Very little else is known about them, except for the fact that they preserved Shakespeare's works.
No, but they were significant.
And yet we have the Silvio Conti Forum.
We have the Tom O'Neil building.
But we don't have—you know, that's a real thing, because the politicians hold the keys.
They're the bursas.
They did erect a statue of Samuel William Morrison.
Yeah, but as well they should have.
I mean, he was an important man.
Which is interesting now that I think about it.
I wrote a long piece on him for Art and Antiques, too.
In fact, when I was leaving, he said, you can take a book from this library.
And he gave me a copy of The Courtship of Miles Standish, signed by Longfellow.
I did this interview just before he died, a couple of years before he died, yeah.
His secretary called him Admiral.
born in the house he lived in.
It was 87.
You know, he remembers seeing Phillips Brooks give a sermon.
He saw Lillian Russell in Copley Square.
He used to gallop from his house in Brimmer Street to Harvard by horse, cross the Harvard Bridge, put the exams in the – gallop into the Harvard Yacht.
Morrison did.
In the late – He was an old fellow, wasn't he?
He was 87.
And, you know, we're talking 1910s.
Do you know his book, One Boy's Boston?
One of the best books in Boston, just anecdotes.
But then he put the exams in and galloped back to Boston.
Let's go back to colors.
Primary colors.
This could have been endless.
It's interesting that this book has never been written before.
The primary colors, because it's the perfect book of essays.
I'm not speaking about myself having done it, but just the idea of writing essays on colors blue, red, and yellow.
I would be interested in why Gass only did the color blue, but the color blue is a beckoning, wonderful, magical color, and has a lot of interesting literary associations that he tapped.
I read it years ago, but made a point of not reading it, and haven't since when it was first published by Godin.
So it started with the piece that you did for Arts and Antiques.
Art and Antiques, yeah.
And, of course, the reaction, the response to that.
It was big, and I'm writing another novel, so I did this kind of with my left hand.
I don't mean to say it wasn't important to me, but it was a kind of easy book to write, to compile.
Again, though, a lot of people think I did compile it, which is hurtful, because I think there's a lot of the poetic... It is hurtful, because I was reading it to see.
I know when you pick up stuff... Yeah.
If you're compiling, you tend to pick up the idiomatic structure of the person picking it up.
There is a seamless quality to the writing.
The hamburger all came through the same machine.
Yes, that's right, and I was mindful of that.
I was aware to that when I was reading it, so I do feel that there is a threat.
There's a coherence to it all.
What do you see?
Give me a linear track.
I'll tell you the coherence should be the coordinate established between the mind of the writer and the curious mind of the reader.
That's what I would say to answer that question.
It would be that there are people that abhor intellection.
that would be your book and say... Is that word that your invention, by the way?
No, intellection?
No, that's a legitimate word, yeah.
Why did he bother all this bibliographical matter?
What's the point of that anecdote?
Who gives a shit about the Caliph Omar?
But the point is, the intellectually curious is my reader.
Nabarkov once was asked whom he wrote for, and he said, I look out to your
I look out there and see a lot of little Nabokov, faces of a lot of little Nabokov.
Is that what he said?
Yeah.
But I've been working on a novel about Amelia Earhart and me and Medford my hometown.
I think at least two out of the three essays.
Have you ever seen any of her – I'm interested here – we'll talk about that after the interview.
Anything about her I'd be curious about?
I have a pilot's license I haven't flown in years, so I am interested in anything with flight.
She was not a great pilot.
Absolutely right.
That's bullshit that she was... Absolutely right.
She got the best of the training and everything like that.
She flew across the ocean, but she... She took a truck with her as a goddamn navigator.
Well, that's right.
That was a mistake.
But you're right about that.
She was not... She was good.
She was adequate.
Yeah, but she crashed her plane a lot.
She was not Charles Lindbergh.
She was not the female Charles Lindbergh.
No, nothing near it.
Charles Lindbergh brought the spirit of St.
Louis.
He made his land flow within a half a degree of his dead record.
And she was 200 miles off.
Unbelievable.
She thought she was in Kansas or something.
Well, no, no.
She wanted to land in Paris and she landed in an island.
Something like that.
But when she flew across the country, she was down here.
Yeah, she crashed her plane a lot and all, but...
She was a brave woman.
She was more brave and talented and pretty.
But anyway, back to this.
So I want to just, because I just want to answer the question.
So I can, you see, I think a lot of the anti-intellectuals are out there.
And a lot of the intellectuals say, a lot of, I think someone actually did tell Alan Peacock, why, what's the point?
What's the point?
And I say, what's the fucking point of Hamlet?
What's the point of butterflies?
What's the point, you know?
He had the same opposition.
He had major oppositions in my book at home.
Because they said, nobody in the chains.
We're not going to sell it to the chains.
And to his credit, he said, fuck the chains.
Yeah.
But the sad thing is, that's one problem.
But then they're going to do the book.
But you're going to be very disheartened when and if, and I hope it doesn't happen, as I will be, when people get the book and don't care about the aggregation of knowledge that's used.
In the same way, in my opinion, and here would be my analogy,
is cooking a lovely dinner, centerpiece, a chicken masala, whatever, and the person drives away and says, who does he think he is?
All that stuff.
And did you notice that sherbet, flambe, who, you know, instead of saying, what a wonderful, Nick was a wonderful cook, that was a wonderful dinner.
That's the difference.
So there are people that just, so I consider that an aspect of anti-electualism, but I've never really cared much about readers anyway,
I have my ideal reader, and I was kind of writing to that person.
Little Alex?
Little Faces of Alex.
Tell me a little bit about the essay.
I think maybe I'm trying to formulate how I'm going to write my piece.
And, you know, I think it's ages since I've written a column about an essay.
They're informal essays as opposed to the formal, in a sense... But is this kind of a traditional essay in your view?
No, I don't care.
I would divide, you know, just the scholarly discussion would be that people would divide essays into the formal and to the informal.
And Bacon, Francis Bacon, would have written, he would consider formal essays.
But I think people like Charles Lamb or H.L.
Mencken, to name two...
Gore Vidal, in a way, I think some of his best work is essays.
So I would say they're informal essays.
And while I was writing them, I felt a responsibility to make them entertaining.
I was talking about ignoring readers.
I don't mean to say I was ignoring readers, but I was writing for a certain kind of reader that would be, and since writing is show business to a degree, to entertain them and get them out of the concept of the dry essay and the repertorial,
And try to put, in a way, write the kind of essay that I would like to read, which has the color of, no pun intended, of the culinary, of the sociological, of the anecdote.
So I tried to make this as anecdotal and highly accessible that way as I could.
So I would say they're informal essays.
And that's why they're cyclic rather than linear.
They're not linear, moving from one point.
They could have begun at the end.
So there's a kind of cyclic quality to them.
I mean, you'll do literature, and you'll come back to literature.
Exactly.
And I could have begun in a thousand places.
That's why the seeming randomness, I'm open to the charge of seeming randomness without being guilty of it.
When you decided that we were going to do the three primary colors, I mean, how does it
Do you start with the fund of knowledge that you have?
The thing is, you don't really start... And then are you alert to everything that you see?
In one very real way, I didn't start... You know, I didn't start in the way that one starts a race.
I actually entered.
Do you know what I mean?
I entered the essay, and I came back because... I mean, even I write... I think most novelists don't write in the sense that they start.
I'm making a pedantic distinction between starting and entering.
Faulkner began ... What's the novel?
No, the one I'm thinking with Benji ... Oh, The Song of the Fury.
Yeah, he began The Song of the Fury by just picturing a girl up in a tree, a young girl up in a tree with a pair of dirty drawers.
So I actually entered this, and I couldn't even tell you where I entered it.
But I started looking at putting together paragraphs and stringing together Christmas lights in a way, you know?
So it began with a certain kind of happy randomness.
And I tried to make it... I love this for my tape.
I have an archive of tapes, you know, presenters.
Yeah.
Everyone has... You know, I used to have giddy hands here.
I was on the second 2020 program.
Is that right?
Yeah, I mean, no big thing, but after John Paul I died, I had been in a seminary and a monastery, you know, and after John Paul I died, I had a friend in New York that I knew something about the church, so...
They came, and I was writing one day, and about five trucks from CBS pulled in the driveway.
Here?
Yeah, it was a horrifying experience.
I wasn't prepared.
But anyway, we're sitting outside, and these guinea hens, you know what they had?
They're kind of gray barters, and they're African birds.
They were squawking and running around, and the sound man was bullshit.
She said, shut it off!
What was the first of the piece at 2020?
It was on Pope John Paul I's death, and the mystery of it.
And we're talking about the state of the Turing.
I didn't know about your background in a system.
Yeah, yeah.
Is there some kind of a biographical thing that I could have at some point?
I don't really.
You know, there is one at Udahlke Archive that they printed, but after high school I went into a Trappist monastery, and then I left there and went into the Franciscan.
In Spencer, yeah.
I was there, yeah.
As I said to someone once, I could have been a man of letters, instead I became, I mean, I could have been a saint, instead I became a man of letters.
So, but I just wanted to say, and as I started working in the essays, you know, I began to feel, I just wanted to put a spine around a lot of that flesh, because there's no end.
I don't think a day passes when I don't find another wonderful fact about red.
I was just reading... That you loved it.
Absolutely, yeah.
And Jörg, that's going to happen to you... Oh, it's happening already?
Oh, sure.
I just finished reading... Well, I'm halfway through Kangaroo.
I have never read it before.
It's pretty bad.
The D.H.
Lawrence novel.
But there's a whole red, odd, very odd bits about red and the color red in the first chapter.
I don't even know why.
Well, you sure got a lot of Proust in here, though.
Yeah, well, I love him.
I'd like to find a manuscript of that book.
You talk about... Yeah.
Yeah, and I think... And I'm so glad you didn't call it Remembrance of Things.
Yeah, yeah, I know.
But I think this book also reflects a lot of my taste in literature and fascination.
So there's a lot of the autobiographical in it.
But Greta once said, all writing is confession.
And even in the most formal books or essays that are non-personal, you do confess to a certain person.
There is a personal portrait that emerges.
I'm not sure what kind of a pedantic little pig emerges from this.
Do you have favorite colors and colors that you detest, colors that move you to motion?
I don't have really strong opinions about that.
I tend to like primary colors.
When I was growing up, there were white cars, there were red cars, there were blue cars, but now there's a certain kind of big thrill with the pastel and cars and a lot of other things that put me off.
So I would say that would be an interesting thing, but sunlight yellow has always been a great buoyant color for me.
I see as kind of the embodiment of heaven and, you know, the center of Christ's forehead kind of thing.
I mean, do you see colors, and do you, I mean, like scents, for instance, you can smell something, and I, it'll, if it's a smell, some smells can bring me back 30 years, instantly to a spot.
Yeah, synesthesia, and absolutely, yeah.
Or a sound, or a record, you know, I hear certain songs, certain
I mean, you mentioned jazz.
I love jazz, you know, and I can hear Miles Davis kind of blue, you know, and I zap back to high school when I bought this album.
Well, that's good.
That's a reflex.
I can tell you this.
Colors aren't lost to me.
I remember... How do the colors do that?
I don't think they do, actually.
No, well, they don't.
They wouldn't be as graphic, I think, as sound, but...
I can tell you that colors aren't lost on me.
I remember the color of the brown sweater of the first girl I kissed.
I mean, a vivid brown.
And so I can remember colors.
It's hard to remember smells.
They say it's impossible to remember smells.
I can't remember them, but I think maybe that's why when you smell them, and then you flash back, and that could be part of the same thing.
Well, smell and taste, but see, the smell evokes it, but you can't, if I said to you, you know, you went at a funeral parlor in, say, 1959, and do you remember the smell of all those lilies?
You have an intellectual understanding of that, but it's not the same as the way that Proust dipped that, Madeleine, and, you know, that...
But I remember the smell of the Longo Pole in the Philippines, and I sure remember the smell of, you know... I think you remember the smell, and remember in quotation marks.
Probably.
But that's not original, and I'm not saying that you're wrong.
It's just suggested that that's an intellectual thing.
But I respond to colors vividly, and never think of the 70s without seeing that kind of mustard yellow soup.
that evokes Engelberg, Humperdinck.
And I think I do castigate a lot of the dim... The 70s were icy as a really bad mustard yellow...
Do you remember when everybody wore shirts, pastel colored shirts with these wild, I see these old photographs of myself of the long size and I'm like, I really wear it.
You're talking about fashion or color.
Well, fashion, which involves color.
There was a great lust for the pastel in the 70s.
That's right.
But what I'm trying to say, back in the 50s, cars and refrigerators and many other things were specific.
There were statements made, yeah.
I think there's this idea that pastels somehow, people with great sensibility have pastels.
You know, that avocado green refrigerator somehow bespoke a little more insight into the spiritual provision of its value than if you had just a damn white refrigerator.
I thought, and maybe I didn't see it, but you, of course green is not one of your colors here, but
the genesis of the phrase, green with envy.
Yeah.
Do you know what that is?
Well, yeah, but I talk about yellow.
Shakespeare and Burton and Dunn actually talk about yellow as a color of envy, too.
But wasn't it Robert Greene who wrote The Groseworth of Witch?
Yeah.
He was furious about Shakespeare.
He was so jealous.
Yeah.
And so I think that's where Greene was.
Oh, it could be.
It could be.
I don't think it had anything to do with the color.
I think it had everything to do with the color.
That's interesting.
I've never heard that before.
Yeah.
Remember the famous, the Shakespeare scene?
Decked out.
Decked out as things you can... Remember, it was just... Yeah.
Wearing someone else's feathers.
That's right, yeah.
I forget exactly how it goes.
But I'm reading a book right now, believe me, that's convincing that Shakespeare was the absolute... That he didn't write them at all.
Oh.
Which book is this?
Not the Ogden book.
Yeah.
I know the Ogden book.
It's a damn convincing argument.
Yeah.
Well, who did?
Who was Shakespeare?
He says it was the Earl of Oxford, De Vere.
Give me a break.
And then, do we ever read the... I'm telling you, that's what I said when this book was given to me, and I'm halfway through the book.
It's astonishing.
Did he fool Sam... It was a man that... Did he fool Ben Johnson and... Yeah, yeah.
No, no, no, no.
It wasn't a question of fooling.
It was that
It was that this fellow, William Shakespeare, did write some things, and he was given this.
There's a whole horse get loose from the barn.
It's an astonishing article, because there was a guy named William Shakespeare that was a real miner.
You know, this goes right to the heart of it.
I mean, I had once a Jehovah's Witness here explain to me that Christ was in the Son of God.
And I wanted to, as I was listening, I was crying inside.
It was such a ruinous thing to hear.
Well, you didn't have to agree with him, did you?
No, I didn't.
I didn't agree with him, but it's knowledge, I mean, and I was hearing him paint this, you know, portrait of, you know, in his mind, what Christ wasn't.
So I wasn't agreeing with him, but I was listening to, you know, and there was a certain cogency to what he was presenting.
I mean, what do we know?
But it shook some timbers of mine.
Now, are you,
No, I haven't been teaching for a couple of years.
What did you teach?
At Yale, I invented a course called Autobiography that was very popular.
We read about 15 autobiographies, and each student wrote a 50-page one.
And they were very popular.
There used to be a line waiting to get in that class.
What level?
They were mostly juniors and seniors.
And so we had workshops during the course of the semester.
And then they read the crowning last couple of weeks.
We would take time and everybody would read sections of it.
I had tears and people reading about their father, about their mother, about their daughter.
Oh, it was wonderful.
And I had some brilliant things.
But I taught seminars in Melville, Moby Dick.
Oh, literature, literature.
I thought that you had been involved in the sciences.
Maybe it's the MIT connection.
No, but I did teach it.
But occasionally we'd have to teach creative writing, which I hated to teach.
So you're a full-time writer at this point?
Yeah, writing for magazines and trying to finish my novel.
No, your last novel was with Alan.
That was an adultery, I guess.
That was, what, 80?
87.
So, do you get blocked at all?
No, no, not at all.
I've written, no, I have three books.
I want to show you three books.
I'll show you what I'm working.
I have three books ready to, I have three loaves of bread in there ready to cook.
It's a question where the whole bosom, a book of fables, a book of, second book of poetry, and a book of essays called Artists Who Kill, and other essays, Artists Who Kill Somebody.
And then there were 18 essays.
Is it true?
Yeah, yeah.
No, it actually killed someone.
But writers... For instance, they'd be a couple.
Of writers?
Yeah.
Mark Twain shot a man off his horse and wrote a story about it called The Story of a Campaign That Failed.
And that was the reason, you know, he was so over... He and a couple of rednecks... That sounds like a great... And that's why he went out west during the Civil War, never fought in the Civil War.
But then Caravaggio killed a man, a lot of painters and singers and musicians.
So there's a book of poems, there's a book of fables, ten fables, prose, a book of eighteen essays, and a book of fifty-two essays that Alan, you know, we were talking about this on the phone.
So these people cringe when they see me, and I'm three-quarters of the way through that book.
So I'm not blocked,
I'll tell you something, I don't get asked to do a lot of, you know, if I had written some tits and bums book, I'd be financially, I'd be artistically humiliated.
Do you have it in you to write such a book?
No, I don't, but I'm reviewing the Ann Rice, the new Ann Rice book.
Tell everybody, who are you reviewing that book?
Chicago Tribune, it's Death on a Bun, it is so tiresome, 600,000.
Who contacted you?
Is that John Blades?
The Chicago Tribune?
I'm just curious.
I'll deal with a guy named Larry Carr.
Oh, that's the other paper.
Okay, fine.
Wait, wait, wait, wait.
I don't want to lose a track here.
Tell me about writing the essay.
What kind of satisfaction do you get from writing essays?
The satisfaction is no different than making a pizza.
And fixing a nice... I was going to say a Red Sox game, but no, I have to draw the line.
But, no, I would say the satisfaction is really, it's just the joy of doing a nice page, a nice paragraph.
Don't you feel that?
It's a wonderful feeling.
And, you know, it's a way of taking, to use a rather arch phrase, the cookie cutter of art and putting it into the dough of life.
The dough of life is rather large and unwieldy and dribbling around.
And so you have this bibliographical fact over there and this book collector over there and this nitwit in prison and this.
But what you do, and what I did in these essays is really a way of taking, gathering that dough together, framing it.
You know, there's a real aspect of ordering things that's behind collecting in a way.
Getting the many to be one, one collection.
And that's really, you know, metaphysics is the study of, you know, the many and the one, and the one and the many, the idea of becoming and being.
But what I really tried to do with this book is actually
gather the many into the one, under the rubric of red, all the wonderful and, you know, heterogeneous facts to make under one roof.
That alone is a delight.
You know, I wrote a novel in 82 called Darkinville's Cat, in which... Anthony Bridges picks it as one of the... Yeah, he did.
And there's a chapter in there called The Misogynist Library.
And what I did was compile
A bibliography, as it were.
But it's actually a chapter.
He's going into his library where there's a scene.
So let's say in chapter F, there's a scene.
Then G, they go into the library.
And H, there's another scene.
But G, I actually call it, I think it is called a misogynist library.
And there's a compilation.
And one guy in the review said the book was, I think it was a $21.95 book.
He said it was worth the book, the price of the book, just to have that bibliography.
I was teaching at Harvard at the time.
I called up professors.
I would call up, it was a Russian professor, Sechkerev.
I'd call him and say, hello.
I'd say, this is Alexander Theroux.
I'm calling.
And listen, I have a very odd request.
Go ahead.
Listen, I'm writing a novel in which I'm interested in Russian misogyny.
Oh, well, let me tell you, there are interesting things, you know, that kind of scholarly of the...
That's a wonderful quality I miss in the academics.
Academics I've come to dislike.
Why is that?
They're florists and pedantic dicks, I think.
Give me a quote I can use.
Do you have my book of poems, the book of Gollipop Trollers?
No?
Because I have a real attack on them.
I would say that they're...